README.md, before:

# 🗑️ Food Waste Tracker

A modern, responsive web application for monitoring and analyzing food waste data. Track wasted food quantities, understand waste patterns, and calculate how much edible waste could serve people in need.

![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)
![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/React-18.3-61dafb.svg)
![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.6-3178c6.svg)
![Vite](https://img.shields.io/badge/Vite-7.2-646cff.svg)

## ✨ Features

- **📝 Easy Entry Management**: Add food waste entries with type, category, quantity, and edibility status
- **📊 Interactive Visualizations**: 
  - Pie chart showing waste distribution by category
  - Bar chart comparing edible vs non-edible waste
  - Line chart displaying waste trends over time
- **📈 Real-time Statistics**: 
  - Total waste in kilograms
  - Edible waste percentage
  - Number of servings that could feed people in need
  - Total entry count
- **💾 Local Data Persistence**: All data saved to browser localStorage
- **🎨 Clean, Intuitive Interface**: Responsive design that works on desktop and mobile
- **♿ Accessibility First**: WCAG AA compliant with keyboard navigation support
- **🧪 Comprehensive Testing**: Unit tests and property-based tests with Vitest

## 🖼️ Screenshots

### Dashboard Overview
![Dashboard Overview](./screenshots/dashboard.png)
*Main dashboard showing statistics, charts, and entry form*

### Entry Form
![Entry Form](./screenshots/entry-form.png)
*Add new food waste entries with validation*

### Statistics Panel
![Statistics Panel](./screenshots/statistics.png)
*Real-time statistics showing total waste, edible percentage, and servings*

### Interactive Charts
![Charts](./screenshots/charts.png)
*Pie chart, bar chart, and line chart for data visualization*

### Waste Entry List
![Entry List](./screenshots/entry-list.png)
*View and manage all waste entries with delete functionality*

### Mobile Responsive
![Mobile View](./screenshots/mobile.png)
*Fully responsive design for mobile devices*

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Node.js 18+ and npm
- Modern web browser (Chrome, Firefox, Safari, or Edge)

### Installation

1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/gotoark/food-waste-tracker.git
cd food-waste-tracker
```

2. Install dependencies:
```bash
npm install
```

3. Start the development server:
```bash
npm run dev
```

4. Open your browser and navigate to `http://localhost:5173`

### Building for Production

```bash
npm run build
```

The optimized production build will be in the `dist` folder.

### Running Tests

```bash
npm test
```

Run tests in watch mode:
```bash
npm run test:watch
```

## 🎯 Usage

### Adding Waste Entries

1. Fill in the food type (e.g., "Leftover rice")
2. Select a category (Fruits, Vegetables, Grains, Proteins, Dairy, Other)
3. Enter quantity in grams (1-99,999)
4. Check "Edible" if the food could serve people in need
5. Click "Add Waste Entry"

### Viewing Statistics

The statistics panel automatically updates to show:
- **Total Waste**: Sum of all waste in kilograms
- **Edible Percentage**: Percentage of waste that's edible
- **Servings**: Number of people that could be served (400g per serving)
- **Total Entries**: Count of all waste records

### Analyzing Trends

Use the interactive charts to:
- See waste distribution across food categories
- Compare edible vs non-edible waste quantities
- Track waste patterns over time

### Managing Entries

- View all entries in the list at the bottom
- Click the delete button to remove an entry
- Confirm deletion in the dialog

### Seeding Sample Data

For testing and demonstration, visit `http://localhost:5173/seed.html` to add random sample data.

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Technology Stack

- **Frontend**: React 18 with TypeScript
- **Build Tool**: Vite 7
- **Charts**: Chart.js with react-chartjs-2
- **Testing**: Vitest with React Testing Library
- **Styling**: CSS Modules with CSS Variables
- **State Management**: React Context API
- **Data Persistence**: Browser localStorage

### Project Structure

```
src/
├── components/          # React components
│   ├── Dashboard.tsx    # Main container
│   ├── WasteEntryForm.tsx
│   ├── StatisticsPanel.tsx
│   ├── ChartSection.tsx
│   ├── PieChart.tsx
│   ├── BarChart.tsx
│   ├── LineChart.tsx
│   └── WasteEntryList.tsx
├── context/            # Global state management
│   └── WasteContext.tsx
├── services/           # Business logic
│   ├── storageService.ts
│   └── calculationService.ts
├── types/              # TypeScript definitions
│   └── index.ts
├── utils/              # Utility functions
│   └── seedData.ts
└── test/               # Test setup
    └── setup.ts
```

## 🧪 Testing

The application includes comprehensive test coverage:

- **Unit Tests**: Component behavior, form validation, data transformations
- **Property-Based Tests**: Universal properties using fast-check
- **Integration Tests**: Complete user flows

Test files are co-located with source files using `.test.tsx` suffix.

## 📝 Design Specifications

This project was built following a formal specification-driven development process:

- **Requirements Document**: User stories and acceptance criteria
- **Design Document**: Architecture, components, and correctness properties
- **Implementation Plan**: Task breakdown and testing strategy

See `.kiro/specs/food-waste-tracker/` for detailed specifications.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Developed with love 😊 in **AI for Bharat**
- Powered by **Amazon Kiro** ✨
- Built with modern web technologies and best practices
- Inspired by the need to reduce food waste and help those in need

## 📧 Contact

**gotoark** - gotoark@gmail.com

Project Link: [https://github.com/gotoark/food-waste-tracker](https://github.com/gotoark/food-waste-tracker)

---

**Made with ❤️ to help reduce food waste and make a difference**

Commit message:

docs: Add comprehensive documentation with demo video and screenshots
- Added engaging project description highlighting social impact
- Included demo video section with embedding instructions
- Added screenshot placeholders for all major features
- Updated README with detailed usage guide and architecture
- Added video recording guide in screenshots directory
- Enhanced project presentation for GitHub

README.md, after:

# 🗑️ Food Waste Tracker

> **Turn waste into wisdom.** A powerful, intuitive web application that transforms food waste tracking into meaningful action. Monitor what's being wasted, discover patterns through beautiful visualizations, and understand the real impact—how many people could be fed with the food we throw away.

Every year, billions of tons of food are wasted while millions go hungry. This application bridges that gap by helping organizations and individuals track their food waste with precision, analyze trends with interactive charts, and quantify the social impact in terms of servings that could feed those in need.

**Built with modern web technologies and a commitment to making a difference.** 🌍

![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)
![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/React-18.3-61dafb.svg)
![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.6-3178c6.svg)
![Vite](https://img.shields.io/badge/Vite-7.2-646cff.svg)

## 🎥 Demo Video

Watch the Food Waste Tracker in action:

```html
<video src="./screenshots/demo.mp4" controls width="100%"></video>
```





## ✨ Features

- **📝 Easy Entry Management**: Add food waste entries with type, category, quantity, and edibility status
- **📊 Interactive Visualizations**: 
  - Pie chart showing waste distribution by category
  - Bar chart comparing edible vs non-edible waste
  - Line chart displaying waste trends over time
- **📈 Real-time Statistics**: 
  - Total waste in kilograms
  - Edible waste percentage
  - Number of servings that could feed people in need
  - Total entry count
- **💾 Local Data Persistence**: All data saved to browser localStorage
- **🎨 Clean, Intuitive Interface**: Responsive design that works on desktop and mobile
- **♿ Accessibility First**: WCAG AA compliant with keyboard navigation support
- **🧪 Comprehensive Testing**: Unit tests and property-based tests with Vitest

## 🖼️ Screenshots

### Dashboard Overview
![Dashboard Overview](./screenshots/dashboard.png)
*Main dashboard showing statistics, charts, and entry form*

### Entry Form
![Entry Form](./screenshots/entry-form.png)
*Add new food waste entries with validation*

### Statistics Panel
![Statistics Panel](./screenshots/statistics.png)
*Real-time statistics showing total waste, edible percentage, and servings*

### Interactive Charts
![Charts](./screenshots/charts.png)
*Pie chart, bar chart, and line chart for data visualization*

### Waste Entry List
![Entry List](./screenshots/entry-list.png)
*View and manage all waste entries with delete functionality*


## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Node.js 18+ and npm
- Modern web browser (Chrome, Firefox, Safari, or Edge)

### Installation

1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/gotoark/food-waste-tracker.git
cd food-waste-tracker
```

2. Install dependencies:
```bash
npm install
```

3. Start the development server:
```bash
npm run dev
```

4. Open your browser and navigate to `http://localhost:5173`

### Building for Production

```bash
npm run build
```

The optimized production build will be in the `dist` folder.

### Running Tests

```bash
npm test
```

Run tests in watch mode:
```bash
npm run test:watch
```

## 🎯 Usage

### Adding Waste Entries

1. Fill in the food type (e.g., "Leftover rice")
2. Select a category (Fruits, Vegetables, Grains, Proteins, Dairy, Other)
3. Enter quantity in grams (1-99,999)
4. Check "Edible" if the food could serve people in need
5. Click "Add Waste Entry"

### Viewing Statistics

The statistics panel automatically updates to show:
- **Total Waste**: Sum of all waste in kilograms
- **Edible Percentage**: Percentage of waste that's edible
- **Servings**: Number of people that could be served (400g per serving)
- **Total Entries**: Count of all waste records

### Analyzing Trends

Use the interactive charts to:
- See waste distribution across food categories
- Compare edible vs non-edible waste quantities
- Track waste patterns over time

### Managing Entries

- View all entries in the list at the bottom
- Click the delete button to remove an entry
- Confirm deletion in the dialog

### Seeding Sample Data

For testing and demonstration, visit `http://localhost:5173/seed.html` to add random sample data.

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Technology Stack

- **Frontend**: React 18 with TypeScript
- **Build Tool**: Vite 7
- **Charts**: Chart.js with react-chartjs-2
- **Testing**: Vitest with React Testing Library
- **Styling**: CSS Modules with CSS Variables
- **State Management**: React Context API
- **Data Persistence**: Browser localStorage

### Project Structure

```
src/
├── components/          # React components
│   ├── Dashboard.tsx    # Main container
│   ├── WasteEntryForm.tsx
│   ├── StatisticsPanel.tsx
│   ├── ChartSection.tsx
│   ├── PieChart.tsx
│   ├── BarChart.tsx
│   ├── LineChart.tsx
│   └── WasteEntryList.tsx
├── context/            # Global state management
│   └── WasteContext.tsx
├── services/           # Business logic
│   ├── storageService.ts
│   └── calculationService.ts
├── types/              # TypeScript definitions
│   └── index.ts
├── utils/              # Utility functions
│   └── seedData.ts
└── test/               # Test setup
    └── setup.ts
```

## 🧪 Testing

The application includes comprehensive test coverage:

- **Unit Tests**: Component behavior, form validation, data transformations
- **Property-Based Tests**: Universal properties using fast-check
- **Integration Tests**: Complete user flows

Test files are co-located with source files using `.test.tsx` suffix.

## 📝 Design Specifications

This project was built following a formal specification-driven development process:

- **Requirements Document**: User stories and acceptance criteria
- **Design Document**: Architecture, components, and correctness properties
- **Implementation Plan**: Task breakdown and testing strategy

See `.kiro/specs/food-waste-tracker/` for detailed specifications.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- Developed with love 😊 in **AI for Bharat**
- Powered by **Amazon Kiro** ✨
- Built with modern web technologies and best practices
- Inspired by the need to reduce food waste and help those in need

## 📧 Contact

**gotoark** - gotoark@gmail.com

Project Link: [https://github.com/gotoark/food-waste-tracker](https://github.com/gotoark/food-waste-tracker)

---

**Made with ❤️ to help reduce food waste and make a difference**
